# INTRODUCING COMMODORE 8-BIT COMPUTERS

This legendary series of computers began with the famous Commodore **PET** (1977) and continued with the **VIC-20** (1980/81), the all-time record-smashing **Commodore 64** a.k.a. **C64** (1982), lower-price-point derivative models such as the **Plus/4** and **C16** (both 1984), and the final 8-bit models, the more powerful **Commodore 128** (1985) and its two desktop-PC-form-factor variants the **C128D** (1985/86) and **C128DCR** (1986). The "CR" suffix stood for "cost reduced." From 1986 the classic "bread bin" case **C64** was phased out of production in favour of the higher profit margin variant the **C64C.**

Commodore's 8-bit microcomputers did not include as standard an operating system in quite the sense that many of today's younger users would understand, but a minimalist **kernel** (accidentally spelled **Kernal** and named just so by Commodore), approximately equivalent to the BIOS in an IBM-compatible PC, and the BASIC programming language interpreter. These both lived in a ROM chip for near-instant initial loading, and the user entered BASIC commands to carry out almost all day-to-day tasks as well as to optionally author their own programs.

By the standards of the time these microcomputers offered a quite generous amount of RAM available for end-user development, and were hugely expandable with a then unmatched range of plug-in upgrades and imaginative peripherals forming a huge computing ecosystem and helping to cement an unprecented ultra-loyal following. Early-modern operating system and productivity suite software packages with simple graphical user interfaces (GUIs) resembling those of their Apple Macintosh contemporaries were released by third-party developers for the most popular 8-bit Commodores although most users persisted with BASIC as their daily operating system, as an off-the-peg specification **C64** was not powerful enough to run such packages without serious compromises and limitations. An upgraded **C64** on the other hand, with plenty of RAM and ideally a processor accelerator added via the cartridge port, and twinned with the Commodore 1351 mouse, a forerunner to the famous Amiga "Tank Mouse", could be perfectly adequate for GUI software.

Much of Commodore's 8-bit range remains extremely popular to this day, either through the restoration of the original hardware, or through emulation packages on contemporary systems. The **C64** and **C128(D)** series models in particular are very popular, very well documented by their huge user-base, and strongly supported by emulators on most of today's major desktop platforms, aided by an extremely rich and diverse library of software.

## PROGRAMMING BEYOND BASIC

For advanced users who wished to code closer to the bare metal and achieve much faster execution times than the best efforts in BASIC could possibly achieve for some types of program, including graphical games, there was the option of raw machine language coding - pure binary **op-codes** and memory addresses - which could be entered and executed at the BASIC prompt, or else there was an intermediate option, the purchase of an assembly language software package which could be loaded from media such as cassette tape, floppy disk or cartridge. Assembly language for a particular microprocessor correlates very closely to the machine language; it is just a slightly more human readable expression of the op-codes (the actual electronic instructions that pass through the circuitry of the processor). Many assembler software packages bundled the assembler itself with an early form of integrated development environment (IDE) to better facilitate the entry of longer programs.

## MACHINE LANGUAGE MONITOR (MLM) a.k.a. MACHINE CODE MONITOR

In many antique computing platforms, a Machine Language Monitor (MLM) is a key software or firmware tool which facilitates the observation and/or manipulation of the computer's state from the perspective of a low level language programmer.

Several computers prior to the dawn of Commodore's popular 8-bit home computer range had included an MLM or Monitor application dating back at least as far as the mid-1970s. This would sometimes be supplied as resident firmware inside a ROM (chip). The major CPU manufacturers of the time, such as Motorola and Intel, had long offered Monitor ROMs to be used by developers alongside their CPUs to greatly assist with debugging and evaluating software in progress.

Many advanced early users of the **VIC-20** and **C64,** keen to move beyond BASIC and access the full power of raw machine coding, felt that the absence of an MLM was a significant omission on the part of Commodore, as without any such built-in facility, their attempts to directly interact with the hardware were limited to BASIC programs full of ``PEEK`` and ``POKE`` instructions, a method which, while initially fun for small projects, does not upscale well due to limited opportunities for debugging, compromised speed, and issues pertaining to resource addresses that may need change unpredictably during the execution flow of more complex programs.

Consequently a popular project among early hackers (hobbyist enthusiasts) on this most popular line of microcomputers was the use of ``PEEK`` and ``POKE`` to create one's own MLM. Countless varied efforts were produced by amateurs and professionals alike, many were published as **type-in programs,** a huge part of the 1980s microcomputing scene, in magazines and textbooks. Many homebrew efforts were distributed between fellow enthusiasts via early dialup internet bulletin board services or on floppy disks, cassette tapes or even paper printouts at regional software swap parties and conventions.

Perhaps the most famous and imitated MLM for the **C64** was celebrated author Jim Butterfield's **Supermon,** widely available in a range of formats today for use on real vintage hardware and Commodore emulators such as **VICE** alike. Butterfield's versions **Supermon64** and subsequent **Supermon+64** were originally published as type-in programs in popular magazines such as **Compute!** and **Transactor,** and variants thereof were also included in several textbooks. **Supermon+64** was more efficient, reduced in size by around a kilobyte *vis-à-vis* its predecessor, despite being considered an upgrade, and was also compatible with **TEDMON**, the ``MONITOR`` command built-in to the **C128.**

Commodore rectified their initial omission of a built-in ``MONITOR`` command when designing subsequent models centred around Commodore BASIC 3.5-7.0, such as the **C128** series, the **Plus/4**, **C16**, **C116** and henceforth included a ``MONITOR`` BASIC command as standard in ROM.
